---
layout: post
title: Projection Machine
categories: General
excerpt: Man seeks to project himself wherever he goes. Is that a good model for living?
---

<h3 style="padding-left: 35%"> Man is a pojection machine </h3>


> We write to be read. It is our means to appear knowledgeable.<br>
We speak to be heard. It is our means to appear intelligent.<br>
We dress to be seen. It is our means to display physical beauty.<br>
We work to be appreciated. It is our means to flaunt our talents.

Look at the names we give to all these things. Of writing and speaking we call it self expression, while in reality it is self-projection. When we speak or write, however noble the content, the motive is self assertion. It is to admire ourselves, to show people that we can write, to show them that we can entertain them in speech, to reveal to them how “knowledgeable” we are. In our desperation to talk to people, to establish some physical contact with them, to what great ends we go? We start behaving in a most funny, irrational manner, do all sorts of things to please others, just so that the other person will talk to us. Our intellects must not be made subservient to our vital and emotional cravings. One claim is that we help people by speaking to them, by sharing interesting things with them. Even if this claim has some kernel of truth in it, when we help people, are we truly helping them or are we trying to please them? When the motive of help is to get something in return, is that help or business? <br><br>

Sure, all life is an exchange. Gibran speaks greatly of giving,

> It is well to give when asked, but it is better to give unasked, through understanding;
And to the open-handed the search for one who shall receive is joy greater than giving.

And so one can constantly keep himself preoccupied with the search for the receiver. But there is a subtle point here. This search should not be for the purpose of self assertion, to prove to the receiver that the giver is greater than him. For the Mother says:

> Above all, whatever we undertake should not be done for the purpose of self-assertion. If we are attached to fame and glory, to the esteem of our peers, we are soon led to make concessions to them; and if we seek any opportunity to admire ourselves, it becomes easy to make ourselves out to be what we are not, and nothing more obscures the ideal within us.

This kind of help is a concession, an attempt to please others. Gibran continues a few lines later:

> And there are those who give and know not pain in giving, nor do they seek joy, nor give with mindfulness of virtue;
They give as in yonder valley the myrtle breathes its fragrance into space.
Through the hands of such as these God speaks, and from behind their eyes He smiles upon the earth.

It is this attitude that we must have when giving - absolutely spontaneous, without a thought for the consequences of the act of giving, not even being cognizant of the virtue in giving. In the famous Christian prayer called “Prayer of Saint Francis”, there is a line which reads - “For it is in giving that we receive”. True as it may be, it seems to imply that in order to receive, we must give. For then the act of giving becomes a conscious investment that will reap dividends in the future. Somehow that doesn’t seem right.<br><br>

The only way to avoid this pitfall is to practice restraint, to live from the Self, as the Gita says, and to not seek people. The same Christian prayer has the wonderful solution : “O divine Master, grant that I may not so much seek”. In fact, let us never seek anyone or anything, be it love, admiration, money, fame, glory, or appreciation. If our help is really needed, the Divine will create favorable circumstances that will enable the seeker to find us. By doing this, we are not asserting ourselves, and self assertion is the first and greatest obstacle that we must overcome. Let us also remember that we can never truly help anybody. It is the Divine who uses people as instruments to help those in need. Sri Aurobindo realized that his instructions to Chitharanjan Das were of absolutely no help during the trial of the Alipore case. When Sri Aurobindo despaired that his absence from the political scene was slowing down his cherished dream of freeing India, the Divine revealed to him the type and character of people in the prison as an example of the nation he was raising, some of them who, in his words, "put him to shame by their strength of character". Imagine someone putting Sri Aurobindo to shame! Never think that you are some savior who is out there to help people. If people like you, that is because of the Krishna within you. You must not pander to their expectations by going and talking to them, that is a certain sign that you are admiring yourself. That amounts to letting the Krishna out. Krishna must stay inside, that is the service you are doing to him and the world.<br><br>

And so we get back to the thing which started all this. Bolt, after completing his triple treble at the Rio Olympics, unabashedly declared that he was the greatest athlete of all time. The Mother says that “we should never tell ourselves, openly or indirectly, ‘I want to be great, what vocation can I find for myself in order to become great?’” I am sure we can be better than Bolt. The common concession that the public gives to such a remark is this: a man of Bolt’s caliber can afford to make such statements. A quote by Hardy perfectly captures this sentiment : “Good work is not done by humble men”. If you claim that everyone who does something good, or achieves something great cannot but fail to think highly of himself, the simple answer is that I do not wish to be like everyone. I may be a part of the collective called humanity. But that doesn’t mean that I should think and act like them. The argument of the majority is the weakest one I have seen. “Everyone thinks that way, and so there is nothing wrong in you feeling a little pride, in craving a little appreciation” - but we have not come to the Earth to be like everyone. Let us chant along with Emerson - “Whoso would be a man, must be a nonconformist.”<br><br>

There are two great passages by Sri Aurobindo that drive home the pettiness of our accomplishments, stressing the truth that we are merely instruments in the hands of God. He first talks about Napoleon:

> But the vibhuti, though he takes self-gratification and enjoyment on his way, never comes for self-gratification and enjoyment. He comes for work, to help man on his way, the world in its evolution. Napoleon was one of the mightiest of vibhutis, one of the most dominant. There are some of them who hold themselves back, suppress the force in their personality in order to put it wholly into their work. Of such were Shakespeare, Washington, Victor Emmanuel. There are others like Alexander, Caesar, Napoleon, Goethe, who are as obviously superhuman in their personality as in the work they accomplish. Napoleon was the greatest in practical capacity of all moderns. In capacity, though not in character, he resembles Bhishma of the Mahabharat. He had the same sovran, irresistible, world-possessing grasp of war, politics, government, legislation, society; the same masterly handling of masses and amazing glut for details. He had the iron brain that nothing fatigues, the faultless memory that loses nothing, the clear insight that puts everything in its place with spontaneous accuracy. It was as if a man were to carry Caucasus on his shoulders and with that burden race successfully an express engine, yet note and forecast every step and never falter. To prove that anything in a human body could be capable of such work, is by itself a service to our progress for which we cannot be sufficiently grateful to Napoleon.

And then he talks about the fate of Napoleon in the grand scheme of things:

> The action of the French Revolution was the vehement death-dance of Kali trampling blindly, furiously on the ruins She made, mad with pity for the world and therefore utterly pitiless. She called the Yatudhani in her to her aid and summoned up the Rakshasi. The Yatudhani is the delight of destruction, the fury of slaughter, Rudra in the Universal Being, Rudra, the bhuta, the criminal, the lord of the animal in man, the lord of the demoniac, Pashupati, Pramathanatha. The Rakshasi is the unbridled, licentious self-assertion of the ego which insists on the gratification of all its instincts good and bad and furiously shatters all opposition. It was the Yatudhani and the Rakshasi who sent their hoarse cry over France, adding to the luminous mantra, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, the stern and terrible addition “or Death.” Death to the Asura, death to all who oppose God’s evolution, that was the meaning. With these two terrible Shaktis Kali did Her work. She veiled Her divine knowledge with the darkness of wrath and passion, She drank blood as wine, naked of tradition and convention She danced over all Europe and the whole continent was filled with the war-cry and the carnage and rang with the hunkara and the attahasyam. It was only when She found that She was trampling on Mahadeva, God expressed in the principle of Nationalism, that She remembered Herself, flung aside Napoleon, the mighty Rakshasa, and settled down quietly to her work of perfecting nationality as the outer shell within which brotherhood may be securely and largely organised.

Note the last line in the paragraph, “She flung aside Napoleon”. When mighty Napoleon was flung aside by Kali, what are we but small puppets in the hand of God. Krishna declares that he is the secret presence within all beings. All our actions have their source in him. Bolt’s nine Olympic medals and his claim to be the GOAT is very much the result of Krishna’s action.<br><br>

The motive determines the worthiness of all actions. If the attitude with which we think, speak or act lacks purity of motive, however noble the deed, whatever be its value to other person, its destructive effect is bound to obscure the ideal within us. What is the exact process by which this descent into unconsciousness happens? Sri Aurobindo writes that:

> Trivial amusements stimulate and waste
The energy given to him to grow and be
His little hour is spent in little things.
A brief companionship with many jars,
A little love and jealousy and hate,
A touch of friendship mid indifferent crowds
Draw his heart-plan on life’s diminutive map.

The time we spend trying to impress people is a typical example of a “trivial amusement”. This depletes the energy given to us to “grow” and “be”. This is a very interesting line. The energy given to us has a twin purpose; the first is to “be” - to help us carry out the day to day activities that the world demands of us; secondly to “grow” - use this energy to work and increase our capacities. When we spend our little hours in little things, by amusing ourselves, this store of energy starts depleting. How does this affect us? First, it stops our ability to “grow”. This can be observed in our inability to concentrate, focus our attention on the task at hand, which results in a directionless state, boredom, not knowing what to do next. When we continue to indulge in doing “little things” it begins to deplete the energy given to us to “be”, in other words, we become absolutely tired, depressed and finally fall sick. Sri Aurobindo has mentioned “grow” before “be” because we first become incapable of progress or growth, and then become incapable of carrying out even the most ordinary functions. There is another illuminating passage that gives a wonderful description of the term “energy” that Sri Aurobindo has used here. It is worth quoting it in its entirety:

> A right understanding of the physical and psychological conformation of the human receptacle of energy: The fundamental physical unit is the retas, in which the tejas, the heat and light and electricity in a man, is involved and hidden. All energy is latent in the retas. This energy may be either expended physically or conserved. All passion, lust, desire wastes the energy by pouring it, either in the gross form or a sublimated subtler form, out of the body. Immorality in act throws it out in the gross form; immorality of thought in the subtle form. In either case there is waste, and unchastity is of the mind and speech as well as of the body. On the other hand, all self-control conserves the energy in the retas, and conservation always brings with it increase. But the needs of the physical body are limited and the excess of energy must create a surplus which has to turn itself to some use other than the physical.

What then must be our true aim in life? It is to increase this surplus. This can only be effected by self control, and it is in confirmation with all that we have said earlier: to not seek or speak unless it is indispensable is the greatest form of self control. In conclusion:<br><br>


>We write, so that we can become masters of the written form, so that we can develop our capacity of expression to its utmost perfection.<br><br>
We speak, so that we can respond to questions asked by people in as unassuming a manner as possible. At present, I see that as the only way of helping people without any form of self assertion.<br><br>
We dress, so that we can protect our body from the vagaries of nature, and to cover those parts that are not fit for display. There seems to me no other function that the dress serves, the sole exception being that is an expression of our cultural identity.<br><br>
We work, so that we can worship the Divine through our actions. We work to develop our skills and abilities to their complete perfection. Sri Aurobindo calls this the “out-bringing of all that is best, most powerful, most intimate and living in his nature” - his Swadharma. We work so that we can become better instruments in the hands of the Divine, and as a preparation for a better life.
