---
layout: post
title: On Writing
categories: General
excerpt: What in my opinion are the features that a piece of good writing ought to have.
---

I am hopelessly incompetent at communication, and it is with great trepidation that I record my thoughts on writing, for I have never fancied myself as a wielder of the pen. I am merely a dilettante dabbling in the art of writing under the delusion that I have the requisite skill and talent to pursue it. I write every now and then to demonstrate my familiarity with words that we seldom encounter in pedestrian prose. One can almost sense in my writing a desire to project myself onto the audience; that vain expectation to be read by friends and relatives, and to be of thought of as a thinker and writer. That said, I have always had a an abiding interest in beautifully written prose. For the most part I try to reproduce and imitate what literary giants have produced, despite Emerson’s stern warning that “imitation is suicide”, often unabashedly lifting entire sentences without bothering to quote these great minds. Quite recently I discovered Will Durant and his bestseller, The Story of Civilization. Will was a great historian who attempted to present an integral view of history, trying to bring it closer to the non-expert, and was especially known for his “exceptional style of prose”. A while back I took up Emerson on seeing my uncle quote him frequently. Sri Aurobindo has been a perennial source of inspiration to me. As I explore his works, I uncover gem after gem, of great wisdom and unmatched prose. To study Sri Aurobindo is to study Indian culture in all its complexity and detail. And quite unexpectedly, the more I read Emerson, the more I realize the similarity of perception underlying the thoughts of Sri Aurobindo and himself. Such a unity of vision among writers from opposite ends of the globe reflects the democratic nature of Truth. But an unnecessarily long autobiographical rambling has been thrust upon the reader, something which he didn’t deserve. So let us move at once to the subject matter of this blog-post without any further delay.<br><br>

First and foremost, the existence of any piece of writing, be it fiction, poetry, or essay, is justified if it attempts to express an idea, emotion, or thought. This holds true not only of the written text as a whole, but also of its parts, from the smallest unit, which is the word, to more complex entities like paragraphs. The unnecessary adverb, or the paucity of adjectives can mar the comprehensibility of an otherwise well constructed sentence. The worthiness of the idea, or the intensity of emotion, though important parameters in critiquing a work, can never invalidate the text’s right to existence. If only sublime emotions and truly revolutionary ideas are allowed admittance into the pages of a book, half of the world’s literature would have no reason to exist. There is such a wide variation in the metrics that we use to evaluate ideas, and also in our emotional temperaments, that it would be impossible to engineer any absolute, objective scale for measuring the quality of ideas or emotions.<br><br>

Once this much has been established, the eye of a trained reader immediately searches for a form, structure, or style that supports and pervades the text. The form that we are alluding to here consists of the choice of words, their placement in a sentence; the arrangement of sentences in a paragraph; the flow of argument through the text and so on. A badly written book with wonderful content is like a meticulously prepared chutney that tastes bland for want of salt. The form is exceedingly important, and I would even go to the extent of suggesting that form is superior to content. A badly written book can put off even the most patient reader, while a well crafted work, though devoid of anything that is original, will persist if only for its literary value.<br><br>

In conclusion, form and content are equally essential for a piece of writing to be labeled “good”. I am recording with some hesitation and great apprehension that a section of Indian writers in English fiction are guilty of diluting the standards of English prose. Whether this dilution is intentional, or is a reflection of their incompetence is not very clear. I would even admit the latter as a passable excuse, but a conscious recourse to mediocrity in order to reach the widest audience, can at best be interpreted as a commercial decision, and a shortcut to fame. A generation that grows with such writing in the misguided belief that they are being exposed to literature is indeed a saddening development. With English steadily gaining greater appeal in the nation, and as it looks to cement its place as the lingua franca among Indian intellectuals, the literary baton handed down to us by the likes of Shakespeare, Emerson, and Sri Aurobindo, needs to find safe and able hands if it has to survive the putrefying breath of bad writing on its voyage to posterity.

