---
layout: post
title: Ramayana
categories: General
excerpt: The title says it all!
---

These are the words of Sri Aurobindo on the Ramayana:

> Not all perhaps can enter at once into the spirit of this masterpiece; but those who have once done so, will never admit any poem in the world as its superior.

What are the barriers to entry? <br><br>

Language comes first. The story contained in the Ramayana, its skeleton, can be read in any language, but the epic poem has to be read in its original if we are to understand its greatness. The Ramayana is not merely an idea or a plot. If that were all to it, then language would never be a barrier. A poem is not a sequence of words that fits nicely in a rhyme scheme; a poem is an expression of emotions. This is true not just of the Ramayana,  but for any poem. <br><br>

The next is an understanding of the context of the epic. When was it written? How was society organized during those days? What were the social and moral conventions that were prevalent then? A hasty and shallow understanding of the past will hinder the true appreciation of the epic. For example, Rama's behavior towards Kaikeyi, his step mother, will seem like an extremely stupid thing to do if one disregards the moral standards and conventions of society during Rama's time.<br><br>

The third is the undercurrent of spirituality that is ever present in all things Indian. This is the signature of the Indian mind. Someone who approaches it from a purely historical or scientific perspective, a mind that has steeped itself in the Western tradition, will not savor reading the text. The first two barriers are quite common and steps can be taken to cross them. The third requires an entirely new attitude to life, a totally different orientation and way of looking at things, and cannot be acquired overnight. The spiritual barrier is probably the most profound of the three.<br><br>

Finally, there is a common tendency to look at the Ramayana as a historical document. This invariably divides readers into the binary camps of believers and non-believers. The Ramayana is primarily a poem; the historicity of Rama is secondary. Do we care any less for Hamlet because he only lives in our imaginations? This is captured beautifully by Dumbledore in the last Harry Potter book: "Of course it is happening inside your head, Harry, but why on earth should that mean that it is not real?" This division will go away if we take the collective decision of seeing it as a poem. If the idea of Rama is firmly seated in our hearts, why bother if he really lived and walked on Earth?




































