---
layout: post
title : Dealing with complexity
categories: Education
mathjax: true
excerpt: A process for learning complex things
---

One thing that always strikes me when I observe professionals in any field is their ability to handle complexity in their professions. Some of them are so good at their trade that they make their actions look effortless and give onlookers the impression that anyone could do it as well as them. When Kobe Bryant takes a free throw and guides the ball right through the hoop, it seems like the most natural trajectory for the ball to follow. But the same ball in the hands of an amateur appears to have a negative affinity for the hoop. For the amateur, the percieved ease of an expert and his own incompetence may combine to create a sense of insurmountable complexity. In this post, I will outline the attitude one needs to develop when facing such complexity in the world of ideas .  <br><br>

Complexity doesn’t imply anarchy. Advanced ideas in subjects like mathematics and physics are much like complex systems and have a well defined underlying structure that is not immediately comprehensible to the untrained and uninitiated mind. All enduring ideas have a carefully constructed edifice to support it. This is something we must trust. Anarchy and chaos prevail during the initial stages of apprehending this complexity because we try to measure a colossal structe of thought with our as yet undeveloped minds. Simply because something is complex doesn’t mean that we will never be able to wrap our heads around it. Sometimes it is the opposite. Things that look simple have layers of complexity neatly hidden underneath. This is common when we see masters in action, be it chefs or sportsmen, as they make smooth maneuvers with their hands and feet.  <br><br>

The first lesson in coming to terms with complexity is to look at any complex idea as a system of interacting elements. If we approach it in a haphazard manner, we may still be able to get something of its substance, or flavour, but a true mastery will evade us. Therefore, the way to approach a complex system is to begin by understanding its parts, maybe not to a very great extent, but getting the fundamentals absolutely right. As we become more familiar with sub-ideas, the task of establishing connections among these smaller elements must begin. Once a reasonably strong foundation has been laid, we can slowly start adding layer after layer of advanced information. This bottom-up approach to learning is durable since the foundation is strong enough to bear the might of any load and what is added on top will not destroy what exists below. Additionally, what is added will not be a mere ornamentation, but may strengthen the existing connections, thus paving way for an even mightier synthesis. For this reason an insatiable curiosity to apprehend new ideas is indispensable. If this foundation has not been laid, study will become a routine accumulation of ideas. When a new idea enters, it will have nothing to latch onto, and hence will be forced to replace an existing idea. This is the way, I believe, we forget half of what we learn. The best way to utilise our mindspace is to build extremely tall structures with strong foundations. That is a sure way to increase idea-density in the mind, not by simply accumulating them, but by carefully building one on top of the other, weaving them into the current web and placing them on the mental tower of pre-existing ideas.  <br><br>

Unlike real buildings, intellectual structures have no limit to their growth and this is where the analogy breaks. Humility consists in realizing that we can never stop at the $n^{th}$ floor. There will be an $n+1$, and by induction, a never ending tower of ideas. All that we can say is that a minimum of $n$ floors is indispensable for a healthy mind. Of course, the exact value of $n$ will vary from person to person. A musician will have a very high value of $n$ for the tower of musical knowledge. A layman may be happy with a much lower value. There are other ways in which we can extend this analogy. The mindspace given to each of us is not something that is predetermined. There is always the question of capacity, the part played by nature in the nature-nurture debate; we cannot aspire for the mindspace of a genius. However, expansion is always possible. It consists in clearing off the thick undergrowth of wrong ideas, mistaken beliefs, debilitating fears, and unwanted desires that obstruct our forward march. Once cleared, vast tracts of land open before us for unrestricted construction. <br><br>

