---
layout: post
title: WhatsApp Wisdom
categories: General
excerpt: A short piece on the nature of wisdom in the post-WhatsApp era
---


WhatsApp is an immensely useful tool. It satisfies one of the greatest cravings of the human heart, and for this service to humanity, we must always be indebted to its founders. The desire it so readily fulfils can be called, in its most general form, crap-talk. It encompasses a whole range of absurdities that include, but are not limited to, slander, gossip, rumour, fake news and random talk. The advent of WhatsApp has increased human wisdom to unprecedented levels, assuming that wisdom is a thing that can be quantified. Wisdom in the post-WhatsApp era has been reduced to short fables, and one line messages. Power users of WhatsApp hold that the mere act of reading, nay  appreciating forwards makes us wise. Forward and forget is the new motto. Where is the act of reflection that encodes a good message or quote into the memory? When a quote by Swami Vivekananda is just one among a thousand other forwards, where is the time required to assimilate the meaning of the quote? “Thou art that” is a *mahavakyam*, but the simple line requires pages after pages of commentary to unpack its hidden message. Wisdom and brevity of expression are two very different things. Is there a way out of this woeful well brimming with WhatsApp-ish wisdom? It is to return to the best in the world’s literature. Emerson, Vivekananda, Thoreau, Sri Aurobindo, Seneca and a host of other teachers are waiting for us with timeless wisdom embedded in their texts. Texts age but the teaching remains forever fresh. Let us turn to these men and women from the past and not rest contented with single-line forwards masquerading as wisdom. But a wise saying is good wherever we read it, is it not? Yes, that is true. But we must not let a chat application become the spokesperson for wisdom. At any cost, we cannot let it become our main source of wisdom. At least for once let us act wisely. Stop forwarding and start reading.