---
layout: post
title: How to Start a Speech
categories: General
excerpt: A post that presents the suggestions given by <a href="https://conorneill.com/" target='blank'>Conor Neil</a> in this <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w82a1FT5o88" target='blank'>video</a> along with some embellishments from my side.
---


- Any speaker who is serious about the impact his speech is going to have on the audience will worry about retaining the listener's attention. One measure of a good speech is listener attrition rate, lower the better. So his first concern is to not loose listeners at the start. That could be a disaster. The first five or ten minutes could make or break a talk. Particularly so in small one hour talks. Given the ever decreasing attention spans, this is not so surprising. Thanks to smartphones, it has now become entirely possible to sit through a boring lecture and yet come out thoroughly refreshed.
- In [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w82a1FT5o88) talk by [Conor Neil](https://conorneill.com/), a keynote speaker on leadership communication, he begins by demonstrating two ways in which most of the speeches begin. 
	- The first type is the one where the speaker introduces himself to the audience, his name, where he is from, his educational qualifications, where he is currently employed and so on. In short, he presents his résumé in spoken form. I concur with Conor on this point: this is a wrong practice. But I have my own reasons why this is bad. Firstly, as Conor points out, it is boring and not of much relevance either for the talk or audience. Secondly, and more importantly, it introduces biases into the minds of the listener. Of what nature?
		- This bias could be positive or negative. If the person is influenced in a positive way, probably because the speaker is from his almamater or is considered an expert in this field, then he may suspend his critical mind for a while and trust the speaker's résumé more than his speech. 
		- If the bias is negative, then the listener will prepare himself to contradict whatever the speaker has to say. A negative bias could have its roots in many sources. The listener may not like the speaker's profession, he may not consider his job favorably.
		- The first two points are avoidable biases and the speaker should not let them creep into the minds of his listeners. There are other ways of inducing biases which are not triggered by the speaker introducing himself. These are more subtle - gender, physical appearance, race, accent. The last one is quite common. For example, if the speaker happens to have an American accent but looks Indian, that immediately triggers a reaction. Our first reaction is that the speaker is showing off. But this might be entirely false. What if the speaker is an Indian-American born and brought up in the U.S.? Is it his fault that his English is accented? And there is gender. If a woman gets onto the stage and starts talking about cricket, our first reaction might be, "what could she possibly know about cricket"? Again, entirely false. We need better listners who can suspend their judgemental attitudes for the duration of the talk.
	- According to Conor, the second way in which some speeches begin is by messing around with the audio equipment, trying to check if the audio levels are good, asking the audience if the speaker is audible and making sure that all acoustic parameters are impeccable before starting. This sort of delay might put off quite a few listeners. The speaker has to expend that added effort in grabbing the attention of these lost speakers. 
- Conor goes on to suggests three ways in which a speech could begin and reveals them in the increasing order of effectiveness:
	- Begin with a question that is central to the topic
	- Start with a fact that is striking
	 - Begin with a story or a personal anecdote that deeply influenced you.
- Every speech is prepared with a target audience in mind. But it invariably happens that those who attend the talk come from a wide range of backgrounds. There is some overlap with the core group that the speaker targets, but there could be a significant portion that lies at the periphery and another that is well outside the boundary. In such cases what should the speaker do? Should he try to bring those at the periphery inside? Will this not tire the core group? What about the outliers? These are some concerns we will address in subsequent posts.