---
layout: post
title: Disabuse
categories: General
excerpt: A post about the usage of the word "disabuse".
---

To **disabuse** someone is to remove a misconception or a mistaken belief that they hold. It is to persuade someone to correct a wrong idea that they have. Undeceive is a synonym. Here are some examples of its usage:

 - If a man has a firm belief in God, I don't see why you should try to disabuse him.
 - My first mini marathon disabused me of my illusion that I could effortlessly run ten kilometers in one hour.
 - A ruler of a nation has a set of plans and programs that he would like to implement for the development of his country. He tries to disabuse the country of ideas that he believes would prevent the successful execution of his plans.

We can become more intimate with the word and its usage and remember it better by introducing the general context in which the word is likely to be used. We can think about the verb as a change in some **attribute** of a **subject** by an **agent**.

1. Subject
2. Attribute
3. Agent

Consider this scenario: Arjun believed that all swans were white in color until he saw a video of a black swan patrolling the waters of an Australian lake. The sighting of a black swan disabused Arjun of the mistaken belief that all swans are white. Here we can call Arjun the subject, his belief that all swans are white as the attribute of the subject, and the black swan as the agent. In a general setting we could say that: 


> An **agent** disabuses a **subject** of an **attribute**.


We could dig deeper. For an agent to disabuse a subject there must be a trigger. This trigger can be found in the clash of beliefs pertaining to an attribute shared by both the agent and the subject. This becomes more appropriate if both agent and the subject are humans. Let us say that I am an atheist and you are a theist. The attribute of interest here is religious belief. If both of us are theists, there is no clash in our beliefs. But if we stand on opposite poles of an issue, then the discordance acts as a trigger. Either I try to disabuse you of your belief in theism or you try to disabuse me of my belief in atheism. This can be formalized in the following way:

1. Subject
2. Common attribute
3. Agent

> A disharmony between the views of an **agent** and a **subject** concerning a **common attribute** generates a trigger which provides an opportunity for the agent to disabuse the subject of his ideas concerning the common attribute.


Note that you disabuse a subject of his views only if the subject's misconceptions as perceived by you drop off or are removed. For example, your friend Pavitra believes that Sachin is the greatest cricketer of all time and you think that it is not the case. You have disabused Pavitra of her estimate concerning Sachin only if she is *convinced* after listening to you that Sachin is not the greatest cricketer ever to wield the bat. If she continues to be steadfast in her belief, then your attempt at disabusing her is a failure.
